you
[Applause]
Oh
but also
so we'll update you on the latest
numbers in the state of California we
will walk through some new announcements
and then of course here to catch up
answer any question current number of
people are tested positive the state of
California is 335 that's a 14% increase
from the prior day tragically we now
have six individuals that have passed
away from kovat 19 the novel coronavirus
the state of California has conducted
some eight thousand three hundred and
sixteen tests that includes our 19 labs
of which two thousand six hundred and
sixty five of those tests were done by
our labs but those labs as I noted a few
days ago have been supplemented by
hospitals from Stanford to number of UCS
City Hope as well as our private lab
quest in San Juan Capistrano I'll remind
you that quest currently is operating
just one lab in the state of California
and conducting roughly 1,200 tests on a
daily basis that will substantially ramp
up in the next week or so with the two
additional labs that will come online
we'll get those tests just from that
commercial lab up to five thousand as
much as five thousand five hundred a day
but the total number north of eight
thousand and we are increasing our
capacity on an hourly basis not just a
daily basis accordingly we have advanced
a partnership that was initiated well
over a week ago with verily the health
and life science subsidiary of alphabet
we advanced that partnership with the
idea of bringing to market the capacity
for individuals that have developed mild
symptoms or are concerned about their
status from the perspective of being in
a vulnerable population being our
seniors or at higher risk of contracting
the disease to give them the opportunity
to go on this portal to answer specific
question
to be scored in terms of their
likelihood to be needed to be tested and
then be allowed and directed the
opportunity to be tested at what will be
at launch to specific sites one in Santa
Clara County one in San Mateo County
that portal that page that allows people
to interface will go online tomorrow and
we will then begin to make reservations
and people throughout the course of next
week will be in the opportunity to get
the mobile testing that so many are
discussing and so many have promoted we
expect that those two pilots one in
Santa Clara County one in San Mateo
County will significantly expand to
other parts of the state we have a deep
I and consciousness on the Central
Valley other parts of the state we want
to make sure from not just a density of
concern Santa Clara being one of our top
priorities as a County and that's the
answer to why we're starting there but
more broadly that we look at the issues
of socio economics and access as a big
part of the advancement of the verily
partnership we hope that this
partnership can scale and we believe it
will be a national model there's simply
no other interface that exists in the
United States that allows people a
portal that has questions and the
capacity to do Co spatially identify
where people are so we can identify the
closest areas for mobile testing that
we're aware of in the country and so we
are very encouraged by this partnership
very enthusiastic to finally announce it
I know there's been some conversations
about it in the media but it is going
live this week in the next 24 to 48
hours fully operational in the first two
piloted areas in our state we have the
capacity currently through the assets in
hand be it swabs and that's an issue
that I wouldn't discuss in a moment the
issue of swabs not just the issue of Rea
not just the issue of RNA extraction
kits that are part of our testing regime
but also the availability of swabs but
the first tranche we have over 9000 test
capacity with the swabs and we will
partner with quest in terms of the
Diagnostics of those tests and the
turnaround is typical at quest anywhere
from 2 days some cases 3 days is roughly
the estimate people will be
automatically notified based upon that
screening criteria and based upon that
interface on that portal of their test
results if people have severe symptoms
this is not where we want you to be
tested this is just a test if you have
severe symptoms you need to engage the
medical community directly and so we
want to remind people this is not to
substitute that interface but to
supplement our capacity to get people
that have some mild concerns and or
people that are higher risk to remove
them from over burdening our healthcare
delivery system to get them out of that
setting and to allow people with the
kind of portability that mobile testing
provides to get answers quickly but
again it's just a test and so I just
want to remind people of that framework
and not promote it for something that it
isn't
so we're moving in the next phase is it
relates to testing in the state of
California broadly I think in the United
States there's still some capacity
concerns not only on the diagnostic side
on the back end with the labs both
private public commercial but as it
relates to supplies and one must be
honest about that and forthright about
it but significant increases nonetheless
and the testing protocols are being
advanced again I think quite
substantively with this new partnership
as it relates to the purpose of
developing these partnerships the
purpose of our testing that is to
identify through community surveillance
where we are so that we could begin to
process how we need to manage
the status quo and how we need to
anticipate the growth and spread of the
virus and look at allocating resources
across the state accordingly I mentioned
this a few days ago I'll remind folks we
have about 74,000 hospital beds in the
state at 416 different hospitals we have
surged capacity in our state just shy of
nine thousand beds eight thousand six
hundred sixty one beds to be exact and
that is on the basis of current survey
that's very contemporary of the existing
hospital system we have about eleven
thousand five hundred ICU beds in our
system but that's not just for adults
that also includes pediatric ICUs it's
just shy of eleven thousand five hundred
when you add the two numbers up we have
new and detailed information about
access to ventilators over seven
thousand five hundred eighty seven not
over seven thousand five hundred and
eighty seven ventilators currently
reside in our hospitals and we have
procured new ventilators few hundred
that we were able to purchase and we
also have our own cash both through our
EMSA and our CD pH sites that include an
additional roughly nine hundred
ventilators in addition to the
seventy-five eighty seven that I
referenced so I give you those numbers
because a lot of people have asked about
that information those are the most
up-to-date and contemporary numbers I
also make that point as a point of
consideration and segue to the
subsequent announcement and that is as
we manage this disease in the dynamic
nature of this moment we need to
anticipate spread but we also need to
prioritize our focus and the purpose of
today's announcement is to focus on
specifically what we mean by that most
important thing again is to protect the
most vulnerable protect our seniors in
the state of California we estimate we
have 5.3 million Californians that are
65 years or older of those 5.3 million
five years and over we are prioritizing
their safety because of their unique
vulnerabilities to this virus we also
are prioritizing those with chronic
conditions and prioritizing our homeless
and it's in those three areas that I
want to advance some new considerations
for the public in new direction for the
people the state of California we are
calling for the home isolation of all
seniors in the state of California we
are calling for the isolation home
isolation of all of those 65 years and
older and those with chronic conditions
we are doing so with our eyes wide open
at the magnitude of what that means and
the need to provide wraparound services
to support our seniors in need of
medical supplies in need of meals and
the like the team assembled behind me
and the people in this what we refer to
as sakaar state operation center of
where we reside at the moment currently
have 13 task forces that are working on
a panoply of issues from logistics from
things as basic is not just food but
water fuel and basic supplies to more
complex issues related to work force and
and the like and so we are looking at
this from a very holistic perspective
and holistic lens we recognize that
social isolation for millions of
Californians is anxiety inducing but we
recognize what all of the science bears
out and what we recognize around the
rest of the world that we need to meet
this moment head-on and lean in not
isolate ourselves to this moment but
lean in and own this moment and take
actions that we think are commensurate
with the need to protect the most
vulnerable Californians number two we
are directing that all bars nightclubs
wineries brew pubs and the like be
closed in the state of California we
believe that this is a non-essential
function in our state and we believe
that is appropriate under the
circumstances
to move in that direction as it relates
to restaurants we have more nuanced
concerns and considerations some have
suggested just shutting down all of our
restaurants we don't believe ultimately
that is necessary at this moment
consideration nonetheless is to socially
distance patrons within these
establishments and as a consequence we
are directing that we reduce the current
occupancy within these establishments by
half and we require social distancing
within those establishments will provide
some flexibility in that space and we
could talk more about what that may look
like but in broad strokes that is the
current directive and we will in real
time absorb the capacity to potentially
do more but also try to reflect on the
enforcement side of this which I'm not
concerned about because as you had noted
with most all of our in fact all of our
directives we are seen as socialization
in real time and strong and broad
support not only from the public health
officials up and down the state but the
private sector that is done a remarkable
job meeting this moment so that's on the
restaurant side let me just briefly make
this point there is a concern around
access to food for those that cannot
prepare their own food
not everybody has kind of kitchen you
are I may have not everybody is capable
of heating their food now we're talking
about home isolation not everybody is
able now to go out the grocery store to
get that food some may have limited
capacities relates to deliveries but we
want to expand the points of access to
get those deliveries restaurants by
definition provide those points of
access so having an organized construct
that allows delivery of hot prepared and
nutritious food within an existing
infrastructure we think is appropriate
again to this moment with the additional
steps on bars nightclubs wineries brew
pubs and the like
number three in relationship to seniors
as our top priority and home isolation
as it relates to ball
and new guidelines on restaurants I
referenced the issue of homelessness
this is a top concern in the state of
California in the abstract we have a
hundred and eight thousand unsheltered
homeless individuals in the state of
California we need to meet this moment
aggressively and I can assure you I
mentioned 13 of our Task Force teams
that are residing in this building they
are our teams just working 24/7 on this
issue to get people out of encampments
and get people into environments where
we can address their growing anxiety and
our growing concern about the health of
some of our most vulnerable Californians
out in the streets in sidewalks we are
in real-time procuring hotels and motels
to convert to appropriate sites we have
just identified as just an example this
is no not even close to the magnitude of
what we are proposing but it's just a
point of consideration and a point a
proof point to give you a sense of what
we're doing we have additional 450
trailers that we have identified that
will be dispersing to critical points
across this state and we're working to
address the needs within the shelters so
that again we have appropriate
distancing and we are appropriately
appropriating ourselves it relates to
social mixing for those more neural
communities as well so that's another
area of deep and disproportionate
emphasis that also we are advancing as a
directive as it relates to again
vulnerable populations you saw yesterday
we put out guidance as it relates to an
executive order directing along the
lines of what the CDC and others have
been recommending we codified that in
the state of California on visitation in
our senior facilities our skilled
nursing facilities our assisted living
facilities we now are tightening those
directives to just end-of-life
visitation and that includes hospitals
not just congregate living facilities in
the state so that is also part of what
we're advancing here today so that gives
you a sense of some of the current
thinking of our healthcare professionals
again
them behind me we have our finance team
here and others in this building we are
gaming out the financial impacts not
just to the state's budget but with
disproportionate focus on families in
individual budgets this is a very
different challenge a very different
crisis and we need to meet this moment
even differently than we did in the
2008-2009 years we have to really focus
on individuals so looking at our
unemployment insurance or disability
insurance looking at how we can
complement what was done at the federal
level we're also sharpening our focus on
what we request of the federal
government going forward as we believe
the extraordinary work that has been
done by speaker Pelosi and her
colleagues and we hope soon by the
United States Senate can be complemented
with even more support that we think is
necessary to meet this moment in more
porochial for some more pedestrian
issues related to our work with the
California Legislature we're in
real-time conversations the legislature
about our current budget and how we'll
process
the concerns and anxieties people have
about quote-unquote business as usual an
environment where business cannot be as
usual and will be making announcements
on that and the next number of days
probably the next number of hours
potentially and certainly tomorrow on
the issue finally before I open it up to
questions of schools I want to say this
current number of schools in the state
of California that have already shut
down is 51% of all the districts in the
state that is somewhat misleading number
51% gives about 80 to 85 percent these
numbers are are dynamic and will get you
the real numbers but we're in that range
of 80 to 85 percent of all of our kids
are no longer going to school starting
tomorrow on the basis of 51% of the
district's shutting down meaning the
largest districts in the state 24 out of
25 of the largest districts in the state
of California have already shut down the
one remaining in that group is current
high school district which has remained
open
many smaller districts remain open and
for reasons that are perfectly
understandable and this is something we
also want folks to know on Tuesday we
will be putting out very detailed
guidelines for those schools that are
remain that remained open and continue
to remain and likely remain open and
those that have closed we are vetting
and curating and validating all kinds of
private and public sector solutions to
address the following and obvious real
problems how you feed people that cannot
be fed otherwise because they're on free
or reduced not just lunch but also free
reduce breakfast some districts 80% some
districts even higher of their children
meet that criteria sixty percent
throughout our entire educational system
it's one thing to say you have a plan
it's another to actually deliver on that
plan and with respect not everybody that
closed had that plan so we are making
sure we supplement that take
responsibility to meet that moment
that's transportation issue that's a
logistics issue that's a siting issue
parks libraries where we provide those
supports we also working with a private
sector and I I must call out chef Jose
who was there at the Grand Princess and
is here in this conversation working
with his organization to provide
nutritious meal alternatives as well and
help us with the logistics and the
distribution of food sites throughout
the state of California but we have
particular concern in addition to that
for special needs children and this is
some personal I know all of us that have
any empathy and capacity as someone
whose mother worked for aid to adoption
of special kids this is how I grew up
with a deep consciousness and mindset
for those with physical as well as
cognitive disabilities many those
children don't have places to go we take
for granted that so many of these kids
are going to be taking care of one in
fact they're not going to be taking care
of the degree they should be and so we
are paying particular emphasis on those
with special needs and may
be sure we meet this moment in the
community childcare more broadly defined
and we believe in quality childcare not
just access to childcare what that
really looks like and so that's what
this planning process has been about and
you may have noted just a few days ago
we initiated I put some information out
in the initiation of that planning
process on Tuesday we will lay out in
detail two terms what that vetted and
curated process and the protocols we
want to establish look like from a very
bottom up not top down perspective
meaning districts in rural parts of the
state operate very differently as it
relates to community assets than some on
the coast with large social safety nets
and so we have to meet the needs of all
of our diverse communities remember in a
nation state with six plus million
children and I should just note the
first six states that announced that
were shutting down their education
system combined didn't even have as many
children as we do in the state of
California gives you a sense of the
magnitude of the number of children that
we are needing to address that again
puts a real burden on trying to orient
an appropriate response to meet this
moment the superintendent of public
education been working very
collaboratively us our health and human
service agencies and our logistics teams
that also are represented in those 13
task force's that are included upstairs
and in that total package and those
numbers that I just referenced so that's
it on the schools a little bit on our
new advisories on bars and restaurants
on social isolation home isolation for
our 65 and older population and those
with chronic disease the verily
partnership that we're advancing which
we were very enthusiastic about and we
hope is a model to this country and then
of course an update on the numbers of
people that currently have tested
positive in closing we anticipate as
these tests significantly ramp up the
number of those by definition change the
numerator denominator
number of people will test positive
again we are just trying to break down
how we prioritize those on the basis of
need
seniors homeless and addressing the
health care delivery systems capacity to
meet the inevitable surge and on that I
will just make this final statement we
have been in detailed negotiations and
we will be bringing online in the next
few days significant assets to help
increase the surge capacity of our
health care delivery system beyond the
numbers I just laid out we have already
identified some very large hospitals
that we can bring online that currently
are not operational and we could bring
online in real time we are deep
negotiations and forgive me when you ask
which specific sites are there we are
deep negotiations to secure those sites
as soon as they're secured and the
negotiations are complete within the
next number of days we will announce
those publicly we are also looking on
the basis of the work we're doing to
triage the situation not looking at the
world in the aggregate but looking at
the world as it exists within our
diverse communities meaning we may have
a system that includes some 74,000
hospital beds but not every community
has adequate number of beds so we are
looking to site our focus and our
energies to increase capacity in those
communities that need it the most so
it's yes north and south but it's also
from a regional basis looking at other
parts the state to the inland part of
the state not just in coastal California
but we are very encouraged I am in
particular and I think I could say this
on behalf of mark galley and others by
the advance negotiations on sizeable
assets that could be brought on line
hundreds and hundreds in fact I can say
this minimum 750 beds that will get up
if these negotiations are successful
just by the end of the week in
world-class settings and we have
identified
find many other additional sites that
we're also initiating conversations and
I will conclude on that frame to also
acknowledge philanthropy that's been
incredibly supportive the largest
businesses as well that are helping us
identify those assets and are procuring
resources in a resourceful mindset to
help us with the what with the
formalized leases and potential
purchases of some of these assets in
real time to meet this moment so that's
where we are in broad strokes and we're
happy to answer any questions you were
issuing a directive about bars and
nightclubs and restaurants spending as
well as nursing homes that it's exactly
the same guidance we put out as it
relates to social functions that are
non-essential north of 250 and those
that are non-essential for vulnerable
populations of ten or less what happened
you saw is it was it was overwhelmingly
positively embraced some communities
even went further we have absolute
expectation this will be socialized in
real time we've had the privilege of
talking to many many mayor's today and
county leaders that are hopeful we were
moving in this direction and I have all
the confidence in the world
these guidance along the same lines that
we advanced on large gatherings will
take shape we could do that easily
because we it's a it's a nuance and a
distinction we get caught up in because
to date we haven't needed to do that
we've set out guidance those guidance
that guidance has been met in every
circumstance and as I said in the past
if you want to establish a framework of
martial law which is ultimate authority
and enforcement we have the capacity to
do that but we are not at this moment
feeling that as necessity and to the
extent that people do not socialize and
support this very directive guidance I
would be surprised and we have all the
confidence of will
I'll repeat we had this exact
conversation with many of you as well
last week when we put out the guidelines
as it relates to non-essential events
you saw in every part of this state
those guidelines were followed I have
all the expectation in the world the
guidelines will be followed on this the
same thing that I said then I'll repeat
what I just told Phil just a moment ago
we have the capacity to enforce if
necessary and that is a signature simple
yeah so we have we have very specific
directives to our HR teams on Tuesday
just coincidental to the socialization
of these new protocols and plans for our
schools they'll be coming out with new
detailed recommendations on essential
versus non-essential state workers now I
distinguish between essential or
non-essential and where and there is
some ambiguity of what's essential
what's not and that's why our
departments are working to really line
up some more I think strategic thinking
along those lines but you're already
seen the large number of our state
employees already telecommuting and
mentioned a few days ago agencies like
CalPERS and others we had our future
work commissions already again working
virtually but working collaboratively
nonetheless but not in congregate
settings so it's already taking shape
but all of that will be at scale
formalized in about 48 hours not if not
not in social do not if you look let's
let's let's remind everybody of whose
most vulnerable if we're home isolating
seniors and those with chronic
conditions we have substantially
addressed the needs of the most
vulnerable in terms of not mixing and
social being socially isolated so you
then skew a little younger and healthier
in these environments but we are saying
you've got a socially distance we will
reduce the size and capacity of those
operations by at least half will require
social distancing which is about six
feet tables but we think they're
essential in this respect we need people
to be able to pick up food we need
people to have food delivered and we
need the capacity to meet the needs of
our population and let me say this
frankly we need a productive society I'm
not willing to submit than in this
moment we can't have cohorts of society
being productive just in a radically
different way and so if you're young and
healthy we know this virus overwhelming
science and data is out support
to remind people of that young and
healthy you will work through this quite
well that we still can be productive in
to the extent we feel like we have the
capacity to deliver for 40 million
people their meals their basic
necessities we may then make additional
adjustments but for the moment we feel
this is an appropriate adjustment is why
all these teams have been assembled it's
where we're working on four days but let
me just tell you this we are well
established protocols in the state many
of you sat right here with me
wildfire protocols at scale earthquake
protocols at scale this is what we do
and by the way respectfully do better
than almost anybody else fact better
than anybody else so we have logistics
teams we have scale and we have
protocols as relates to pharmaceuticals
our capacity to complement local
government with state and federal
resources mark your do she is running
these strike teams that will support the
social safety net and those services for
our seniors we didn't walk into this
lightly
we're not reacting to this we've been
leaning into this anticipating this all
part of the protocols that you know well
we have well established through our
pandemic plants and through our modeling
that is ongoing in the state there's a
perception that calculated may not be
aggressive enough I don't deal on
perceptions I deal with reality and I
deal with the reality on the ground 85%
of our kids are no longer going to go to
school on Monday and with respect I
don't think this I know for a fact that
not all these districts have planned for
the needs of these kids next week and
I'm deeply concerned about their health
and I'm deeply concerned about their
safety and are deeply concerned about
their parents inability to go to work
and many of those parents work in
hospitals work as firefighters work as
paramedics work as the people that would
get in the gear to help us advance the
mobile testing throughout the state and
with respect to those governor's they
may have figured all that out
and may have those protocols and process
and be able to answer that in detail but
I can assure you just last night I was
upstairs just working on foster kids
that were working on campus and living
on campus that quite literally are
ending up in our homeless shelters
because there was no plan and that was
related to this a system of higher
education some of them are sophisticated
folks so perception we deal with reality
two weeks my kids district off for a
month I mean is there a benefit from
having all the districts being off in
the same period last Saturday we put out
uniform standards and guidelines for the
state of California we couldn't be more
clear last Saturday we laid out four
schools our criteria crossed the state
of California and it was based upon
conditions on the ground we're not a
small isolated State this is a nation
state I can assure you what you already
know I'll repeat it just for the purpose
of emphasis for those that don't already
know this but Santa Clara counties
conditions are extraordinarily different
than Tulare extraordinarily different
than Madera or Colusa and so while it
may be fanciful and comforting by
perception standards for some to have
one size fits all that's not the world
in which we view the reality on the
ground and so there's no community
spread in some communities there's
significant community spread in other
communities and so we think it's
appropriate on that basis to have the
kind of criteria that we allowed and
advanced for consideration to be
advanced it had been done a week ago it
was advanced very formally on Thursday
and Friday with those announcements and
you'll hear many other announcements
over the course the next few days but
they want superintendents say don't shut
me down help me with these kids because
right now I don't know how to help that
child I don't know how to feed that
child and they're asking us for support
so I could say you know what let's shut
you down you figure it out or I can say
you know what we're gonna do this very
thoughtfully I'm going to do it
I prefer to be responsible to the
reality not the perception all these
things are hypotheticals and we'll meet
the moment and we have the capacity to
encourage people off the streets we have
existing rules and regulations but I say
this with respect
having been a practitioner in the space
on the issue of homelessness I think
there's a lot of Mythology about
resistance
I think it's wildly overstated and and
and I just don't buy that someone
prefers to live in an encampment when
they have the opportunity to have a key
lock a door a house a place to call
their home their own I just don't
so I think that is an extreme and there
may be those circumstances and we'll try
to meet people where they aren't
accommodated but I'm not ratcheting up a
mindset of enforcement police stated
this stuff yeah it's effective the
guidance is being socialized in real
time effective correct up right now
we know how much you know how I can
answer that question revenues can
fluctuate in the state we've seen vanish
in a hurry yeah but obviously we're
headed into a recession do you feel like
the 20 billion change well we we've
never been in a better position to
weather a recession period full stop
nothing about our current fiscal status
is even comparable to Lehman days
September 15 2008 when the macroeconomic
wheels fell off during the last Great
Recession we did not have the kind of
reserves liquidity that we have today so
we're in a completely different place
we're much better position I have
submitted two budgets Governor Brown
submitted eight it almost the redundancy
of our call of concern extended into my
two budgets and that is we model a mild
recession that we argue is mild in this
bookmark less severe than Oh 809 but
more severe than 2001 and in that
modelling we see a three-year impact to
the state's general fund of seventy
billion dollars which would impact or
rather to our revenues seventy billion
but impact our general fund by forty
billion dollars we think within the
margin of error ability then current
environment to absorb that exists even
with our reserves and our capacity to
move things around that's current
environment to the extent this is more
severe we are better positioned I think
the vast majority of states in this
country and you're then having a
different conversation about federal
supports at a level that are even more
significant than the modest what 15
billion you received during the the last
downturn
Halpern has a large immigrant population
so back to the schools and restaurants
is that your reluctance to issue more
concrete guidance putting lives at risk
given that many is pushing an immigrant
community to take four take care of
grandparents parents and other ailing
loved ones the guidance is crystal clear
bars the guidance is very crystal clear
we are throughout the state of
California I've seen all bars nightclubs
brew pubs others be shut down for the
moment we are asking that restaurants
practice deep social distancing and deep
guidelines that include reducing
occupancy by roughly half we see that is
essential not only for those same
individuals that need a paycheck that
desperately need to know that they can
feed their own family at home that we
also support them in a very thoughtful
and pragmatic way particularly if there
are workers that are younger and
healthier then it should not be in fear
of this virus taking their lives we are
separating in addition to that all
customers 65 and over and those with
chronic disease we think now we don't
think we are guided by the science
health we are guided in a very
thoughtful way not a framework of
Asteria that I think often is the case
around some of the decisions that are
often made before we think through the
consequences that's why our guidelines
are very clear as it relates to
congregate facilities seniors making
sure we home isolation includes all you
have to go back
there's no disconnect we have as you
know you've been there and written about
some of these I hope and read our
guidelines that were very prescriptive
as it relates to mixing as it relates to
those circumstances and how people
should conduct themselves as if they
have it when they're engaging their
grandparents we've laid these things out
and detailed terms so we've done this
very very thoughtfully and and again I'm
just guided by the experts guided by all
the folks that we're in contact with not
just within the state and a local level
state level but our federal partners and
by some international best practices and
and to the extent that the conditions
change we will evolve these guidelines
and we think they're appropriate for the
time you said there's someone on the
phone so why don't you want to answer
more of the details on that sure thank
you mark alley secretary for Health and
Human Services we are working on
specific guidance for child care
facilities it is going to mirror very
much the guidance that we've given
already around k k through 12 and we
will be coming out with those very soon
ass movie issued guidance on addictions
or additional assistance to help renters
who may be impacted by I believe we'll
have those out ads the latest tomorrow
afternoon we don't want mixing we've
laid that out people that have been in
existing social cohorts that's one thing
but mixing those social cohorts is the
point of concern and that's where our
guidance over the course last few weeks
has been very prescriptive that's been
reinforced in guidance we put out on
Friday guidance we put out on Saturday
and guidance I'm putting out today
there's a narrative and a thread that
connects what we have done since the
beginning of this pandemic and I remind
you for us we were front and center on
this going back to December of last year
formerly with the repatriation of six
flights from overseas in January and
remarkably today through the conclusion
of this challenging logistics operation
of which I think we met the moment with
the Grand Princess I should just let you
know the extent anyone is now interested
the Grand Princess is leaving the Port
of Oakland tonight at 7:00 they're
leaving with 300 to we we believe
anywhere from 330 to 340 crew members on
board we're able to get the majority of
the crew members on two planes yesterday
and today back to their home countries
they have a skeleton crew that will
allow them to operate the ship there are
six passengers that remain on that boat
foreigners that we are also working to
repatriate but are having more
difficulty based upon working with their
respective counter counterparts and with
the State Department or Council generals
we have 75 medical crew that are on
board that's not just their own medical
crew but HSS supplemented medical crew
and it will be anchored in the bay and
an appropriate site for the 14-day
quarantine all the others will have left
on flights the last flight goes out at 6
p.m. tonight and we have one other
flight leaving at 3 o'clock today and so
that should broadly wrap up the Grand
Princess but what it begins is the
process of testing all the passengers
and those testing protocols and
processes are happening at Dobbins Air
Force Base Lachlan Travis Air Force Base
in Miramar and those protocols are being
organized through a spur CDC HSS and
those will be variety information with
our federal counterparts over the course
the next new days on a number of tests
number of tested positive and how those
quarantine operations are going this
pandemic was more severe in the state
I'm curious what the full scope of your
authority is I mean you have at the bat
capacity you asked your the capacity
under circumstances if necessary to call
up the National Guard you have the
capacity under circumstances to call for
the enactment of the kind of
restrictions that we just advanced at
Marshall on the line we have we we have
broad authority I don't want look what I
in forgive me will exercise the
appropriate authority in consultation
with the experts with an eye on public
health and public safety we have scoped
out all of the above we are working in
concert day in and day out with not just
our federal partners but other states
looking at best practices around the
world we have teams that are detailed
review of what worked what didn't work
in China work and didn't work in
Singapore what's going on in Italy
what's not going on based upon some of
the headlines same with France same with
Spain we have people on the ground
literally that we are in contact with
they're providing real-time information
we have our legal team that is reviewing
all of those questions in detail we work
in the FAA on flights
nation again which we already had flight
protocols that we brought all this is
part of our All Hazards strategies
Haneda minutes this for mark this is
what he does
24/7 FEMA partners so yes and yes and in
to the extent we need to leverage any of
those things we will but I don't want
people to get where you're going and
just understand from my humble
perspective we don't need to get there
right now but we're preparing for
anything great things about Trump but
there's been you were talking also about
some not all that the test kits were
complete and other experiences when
you're talking about gaming out that
that's that's I'm sort of beyond the the
individual frame I'm working in a more
dynamic environment where I'm worried
now about access to adequate number of
swabs not just the RNA extraction kits
and some of the issues related to the
reagents I you know we're gaming that
out we've been very we've been very
forthright with the administration and
and and their counterparts on I'm just
giving them a sense of where we think
that will go and how we can absolve some
of the existing rules or address some of
the distant rules that may allow us for
example some of the swabs you need to
swab twice maybe there's protocol swab
just once that will by definition double
the number available working with the
FDA and others so those are ongoing
conversations they've all been very very
positive we worked hand in glove on this
grant process operation that was a
federal Lee led operation and we worked
very effectively on that the
repatriation worked effectively on
testing kits we got another what 8800 we
have we're getting new kits in real time
that are arriving we have capacity for
just I'm 9000 tests as of today little
was 8800 and somewhat so so far we're in
that in a good place and and we're when
we need something we are very vocal and
very honest and forthright about what
is expecting in terms of that support
yeah well we will have eviction
protocols out tomorrow to address those
anxieties we actually we just had some
experts advise us on what worked and
didn't work in Puerto Rico related
specifically to the issue of mortgages
and how there was some relief on
mortgages so there are a lot of things
and so here's here's what we're doing
specifically we have the benefit of
again extraordinarily close relationship
with Speaker Pelosi her leadership is
demonstrable her success was diminution
and others to advance a bill that we
expect will be supported by the Senate
we believe it's one of many steps that
needs to occur so we are processing what
that means in a state as large as ours
remember 5th largest economy in the
world 40 million people how the UI
benefits how it all works how it
translates to real people and then we're
going to assess the gaps and where the
state can assert itself with those gaps
and where we need new rules and
regulations all that's happening in real
time could assure you that's all Keely
is doing in real time with our Council
of Economic Advisors and working with
the budget team and working with staffs
with our congressional representative
Lee speaker Pelosi we're gonna we worry
about our workforce we worry about the
lives of those our most vulnerable
I'll give you a sense of how many are
still working 70 years old and the
health field
I'll get that information back to you
but this is broadly a directive that
includes all Californians
I don't know about any of these folks
we've been I said this two days ago and
I stand by it
until the most vulnerable are tested and
tell those with symptoms or higher risk
are tested I don't think it's
appropriate when I'm critical of the
existing testing capacity to deny that
test to someone that is in a high risk
fortunately I don't believe I am my age
relative health same with my wife and
that's just or another reminder that we
have the capacity to still be productive
in this society but we need to protect
those that are most vulnerable to this
virus and that is why you need to
distinguish this is not I think there's
a sense and I've done this a long time
there's a sense everything's black and
white one size fits all you know go hard
or don't yeah I caution that you just
have to be guided by common sense and
you've got to remember it's not just the
application of a law or an enforcement
or directive it's the implementation of
that and my job is to anticipate the
application and in the end of
implementation there's a lot of
difficult things that we need to attend
to and so as this gets socialized and we
see where there's areas improve in real
time we'll support but on say on the
issue of being tested I have not been
and and will not be tested humbly until
I saw any symptoms and or feel that
others have not been appropriately
tested there are plans being developed
there are plans that are well
established as it relates to planning
and protocols that have existed for
earthquake scenarios and plans that you
know have been at scale since 2015 one
of the worst fire seasons we had in
history until 2017 the worst fire season
we had history and then in 2018 worse
yet so at scale the operation center
here is a logistics center to
specifically address those issues
that's a well-oiled machine
the application course across the state
is a logistics operation we've never
faced and so I'm not naive about the
challenges but being able to meet the
moment and having a planning apparatus
in place we certainly do yeah we're
working with IHSS and home supported
services working with local 215s see how
you working with Adult Protective
Services in fact was one of the meetings
we were having before I felt I needed to
come down here because you were all
getting antsy and I wasn't down here
earlier I can lay out more specific
terms what we're doing Frey HSS and
others we have very detailed protocols
working with the unions that are
uniquely positioned to scale the safety
of those individuals and the workers
which we are also concerned about we I
talked to two chairmen chairwoman last
night chairman of another a casino and
they are having an all-hands meeting
today we put out our guidelines CDC put
out their guidelines we have a
nation-to-nation relationship we respect
sovereignty and they deeply respect that
relationship and our broader health
concerns the conversations we've had
with the principal leaders of our tribal
nations has been incredibly productive
the guidelines we believe were
incredibly helpful in advancing their
decision-making and as you noted you
have a number some of the largest
casinos in America that have already
shut down here in the state of
California card clubs accordingly and we
are continuing to work with these tribal
nations and today is a very important
day as they're all convening to tighten
up those regulations
movie theaters we laid out specific
recommendations two days ago we talked
about queuing we talked about socially
isolating individuals are separating
individuals we actually have very
prescriptive terms that we laid out for
theatres if they want to remain open
you cannot congregate individuals unless
or at least six feet apart that the
reservation system is the prioritized
situation or is a prioritized framework
to which we would support the theaters
remaining open and we have queueing
guidelines and we laid those out in very
detailed terms as well look we're all
doing our best I'm trying to lead a
nation state the state of California
where many parts one body both the
nation itself certainly the state of
California 58 counties thousand plus
school districts and so we we are
working very very collaboratively I'm
not pointing fingers we're trying to
solve problems in real time we're trying
to identify problems anticipate where
we'll be in two three weeks
we're running every conceivable scenario
planner you want a little bit more
granularity on that let me just tell you
some new partnerships with ESRI Facebook
with a couple other blue dot an
incredible company that came in looking
with AI and big data to analyze travel
patterns within and outside of the state
flights that come in where people go
after they come into the state so that
we can quite literally model spread so
that we're not looking again at the
aggregate of our healthcare delivery
system but where we'll be stretched by
zip code so we're at a different level
in that respect we're sharing a lot of
that with the federal government they're
sharing a lot of their data and support
to us but we're in a mindset of an open
hand not a closed fist
strong concern and a lot of I think
really good discussion about bending the
flattening that curve and there's I
think widespread concern at least from
the people that I've been talking to
that actions aren't being taken fast
enough and there's a lot of parallels
being drawn between what's happening
here and Italy being 10 about 11 days
ahead of us and I just wanted you to
maybe talk about no it's on its what
that's what we do 24/7 I'm how care
provider is having to decide what people
keep alive and what people to let die
look we're me let's let's take a step
back
every single thing we're doing I'll
remind you what I just said and I'll
repeat it cuz it could be helpful I told
you that we have analyzed deeply the
best practices and practices that could
not be construed as good practices in
China Singapore South Korea Italy Spain
Canada we're reviewing all that in real
time I am well aware the anxiety coming
out of Italy headlines the that has
already been identified before
respectfully was identified on the
national news or international news and
we're running every protocol in Scenario
Orlean I don't think it's insignificant
respectfully the announcement we're
making today in the nation's largest
state that we are in essence home
isolating 5.3 million people seniors and
those with chronic illnesses that are
even greater number that we're shutting
down bars and gatherings across the
spectrum that we already and moved to
shut down non-essential events of large
scale and cities have followed suit and
even smaller scale that we are putting
together these strike teams and
protocols to meet the needs of these
seniors and we're doing all that in real
time that we're announcing the entire
restaurant industries got to shut down
at least half its operations and beyond
that make sure they're even adopting
social isolation protocols that are
best-in-class so these are profoundly
significant steps in real time
and their significant steps up from two
days ago we may be back here tomorrow
day after and can assure you I've got
executive orders I've got Horsemen
mechanisms I have the capacity to pull a
lot of things and bring them to the fore
in real time we're running those
scenarios but but no we're guided deeply
by what's happening not just by anxiety
not just by fear but a very pragmatic
response to meet this moment without
creating other unintended consequences
we game out these decisions not just to
meet the stress and anxiety that exists
today but the stress and anxiety we may
create by trying to solve those that may
be exponentially worse than what you
were trying to solve for when you can't
feed kids that's a health crisis when
you can't take care of kids that can't
take care of themselves can't bathe
themselves because they can't
communicate can't physically walk that's
a public safety crisis you've got to
address those things and those are
magnified by millions and millions of
other examples quite literally in lives
all across the state so that's that's
how we're conducting ourselves so what
are you what in those scenarios and you
can do the same thing potentially
playing out in restaurants I mean New
York is an example that so they had
guidelines on bars and restaurants and
clearly you saw the news where people
are out there and clearly they weren't
being forced governor cuomo made the
point what's the right point that it's
their job of in this case it was New
York City New York City Police
Department to enforce those things and
you know we we rely on our local
partners these are the rules and
regulations and I'm not a fatalist I
don't giving up that everybody's not
going to buy in fact it was rather
extraordinary how quickly people moved
to embrace our last guidance at scale
there are a few exceptions but you saw
that not only did cities and counties
embrace the guidance sakes she brought
guidance even down more granularly at
the local level and there was massive
number of cancellations major league
football our mayor soccer baseball
basketball all these major sports shut
down within hours I'm confident these
guidelines will be well received and
will be appropriately enforced and to
the extent again forgive me you will not
need to ask me again if we need if we
identify that's not being we will do
what we need to doing I'm not worried
about anybody else and you guys were on
24 questions both of you I can have a
private event with the two of you if
anyone else has any questions good a
little balance it fell okay yeah I yeah
I'm the governor of the state of
California I take my responsibilities
seriously as an individual as a citizen
as a father parent husband as a leader
in my respective role in the community
not just as governor of the state of
California we all have to hold ourselves
to some individual account and and so
that's my mindset and you know I think
the vast majority of us feel the same
way individual decisions in the
aggregate will determine the fate of
this moment and all of us need to
individually take responsibility to meet
this moment and that's why you asked me
do we feel we need to enforce I think
people individually get they need to do
the right thing and by isolating those
that are most vulnerable I think will
create a consciousness of what this is
and what this isn't and allow us some
space to deal with all these logistics
and allow us to fill to the extent their
gaps in real time
there's a report out these are report
out that tracked people who are
symptomatic but tested negative for the
flu especially up in Washington State
I'll leave that to dr. angel already you
haven't even finished the question this
sounds like a question for her feeling
was that maybe tracking what's not being
tracked by actual testing I just wanna
know if you if you have information
about California on that on data on
California as far as that goes
I'm sorry as far as the track sorry
symptomatic
yeah the symptoms of the corona virus
tested negative for the flu so yes there
are we are tracking that we're following
it it does look like ili which is when
it's called it's individuals who have
these symptoms that are consistent with
flu but test negative we do see those
numbers increasing and we do think that
that's reflecting an increase also in
corona virus in our state as we've seen
with the numbers coming out daily so we
are not surprised to see that either it
is an indication of our understanding of
where this is going which is why these
orders are so important at this moment
to protect those that are so what's so
very important about health care workers
is that constantly they're going from
one patient to the next patient and
those patients that they care for are by
and large the types of people that were
current concerned about for for Cova 19
so they're not only protecting
themselves from getting infected because
if they get infected they'll infect the
people they're caring for they're
actually protecting the people they care
for even more so so essentially these
are people who are in very close contact
with vulnerable people so it's very
important that we make sure that they
are fully protected so that they don't
also spread it around yeah both ways
elaborate a bit on the directive
advisory whatever whatever it is
regarding the limitation of hospital
visits to end-of-life care is that an
advisory is that in order what is it
it's consistent with the guidance we put
out yesterday on assisted living sniffs
and the like it's consistent with the
guidance I put out on non-essential
events large-scale events consistent
with the guidance we're putting out on
bars and restaurants and consistent with
the guidance on home isolation so it is
it is it we expect it will be socialized
we didn't come up with it I randomly
we've been working with the industry in
many respects almost universally I
imagine they are expecting it and are
already preparing for broadening their
enforcement capacity by the way includes
remind you hospitals as well thank you
guys
you